Welcome back.
Now, let's take a look
at video processing.
This is the block diagram
that we were looking at.
The main workhorse of video codecs for
bit rate reduction [COUGH] is
motion estimation, and
motion prediction at the sender side.
And those bits are sent along
with the texture information.
And at the receiver,
we do motion compensation.
I do not show that in this block
diagram and we build on top of
the still image compression JPEG texture
coding aspects that we just talked about,
and on top of that,
we add motion processing.
So this is how motion estimation and
compensation works.
[COUGH] We use the current frame,
when we are working on the current frame,
we use one or
more of the neighboring frames.
It can be previous frame or
it can be a future frame,
which of course introduces some delay.
And these are called the reference frames.
And we estimate a pixel or
groups of pixels that have moved
with respect to the reference frame and
once we know which groups
of pixels have moved,
we get a difference in the current
frame that we are working.
And we actually work
only on the differences.
That's why this is called
DPCM motion estimation and
differential pulse code modulation.
We use DCT as the transform and
then the quantization and
the run length encoding and the Huffman,
they are exactly the same
as what we used in JPEG.
[COUGH] So
this leads to the concept of the,
what we call, group of pictures GOP and
when the content is completely new,
when we get a brand new frame
which has no correlation with
either past or future frames.
We called it as an intra-frame that
can be decoded completely on its own.
This is like JPEG.
The predicted frames use only the previous
frames to compute the current frame and
the differences are encoded and sent.
This is like ADPCM that we
saw in speech and audio.
You can also use bilateral prediction,
prediction from future and
back and preview and past.
These are called B-Frames.
So till you get another I-Frame,
you're basically building off the previous
I-frame and the predicted delta.
So there is some additional latency
involved between the I-frame.
So if you get a nearer
in the transmission,
[COUGH] you would not
recover it very easily.
I'll get back to that in a minute.
The other important way,
the video coding can get
very high compression ratios
even for the texture and also its so
factor on motion aspects is.
Instead of just looking at 8 by 8
blocks wow we look at 16 by 16,
4 by 4 and the combination of these.
And all this acts a lot of complexity
at the encoder and
slightly more complexity at the decoder.
But it's really the encoder that
gets bit [COUGH] very badly.
But you do get much bigger
data rate reductions.
So as I was saying,
one of the weak links of getting all this
compression and
sucking away all the redundancy is,
even if you have a slight error
between the two I-Frames.
The prediction loop for
the P-Frames and the B-Frames
between the sender and
the receiver is completely broken.
They're not in sync anymore.
So the error stops building up.
Till you correct it with an I-Frame or
some other mechanism.
And the visual quality can goes out very,
very fast, till you manage to synchronize
the prediction loop at the receiver
with that of the sender.
[COUGH] Unfortunately the MPEG and
ITU standards that define MPEG 4,
H.264, H.265.
[COUGH] excuse me,
this specified only the big stream and
the operation of the receiver.
So the encoder is free to do
whatever they want as long as it is
generating compliant bit streams.
This is slightly different from real time
communication standards such as in 3GPP,
in 3GPP2, very unique to define
the encoder operation and
the decoder operation and
the bits completely.
So, what happens is,
if you do not have other mechanisms,
this is a simulation in a cellular
network with pedestrian video model.
You can see the quality,
the error occurs at frame number 88.
And from that time onwards, at 98 and 123,
you can see significant
degradations in the video quality.
I'm sure you have seen this on IPTV and
video streaming also when
the channel is not good.
Other than that you do get
significant reductions
in the data rate compared to
what you could do before.